**PROTEINS AND THEIR STRUCTURE**

Proteins composed structural and motor elements in the cell, and they serve as the catalysts for biochemical reactions. Each gene in cellular DNA contains the code for a unique protein structure. These proteins are assembled with different amino acid sequences, they are held together by different bonds and are folded into a variety of three-dimensional structures (folded shape, or conformation, depending directly on the linear amino acid sequence of the protein).

Amino Acids (a central carbon atom linked to an amino group, a carboxyl group, a hydrogen atom, and a variable component called a side chain) linked together by peptide bonds (long chain) make up the protein structure. Peptide bonds are formed by a biochemical reaction that extracts a water molecule as it joins the amino group of one amino acid to the carboxyl group of a neighboring amino acid.

Proteins are built from a set of 20 amino acids, each having a unique side chain (non polar / positive charges / negative charges / polar but uncharged). These side chains can bond with one another to hold a length of protein in a certain shape or conformation (Charged amino acid side chains - ionic bonds, polar amino acids - hydrogen bonds, Hydrophobic side chains - Van der Waals interactions, noncovalent bonds). This series of interactions results in protein folding. 

Amino acid sequence drives folding and intramolecular bonding, determining its 3D shape. Also, Hydrogen bonding between amino groups and carboxyl groups in neighboring regions of the protein chain causes certain patterns of folding to occur. The final shape is the most energetically favorable one (during folding, they test a variety of conformations before reaching their final form, which is unique and compact). The folded proteins are stabilized by noncovalent bonds between amino acids, as well as chemical forces between a protein and its immediate environment.

**PROTEIN FOLDING PROBLEM**

Figuring out how proteins twist and fold into their final 3D shape :-
What makes proteins fold the way they do? Like what forces and rules govern this?
How does the folding actually happen step by step?
Can we look at a protein's building blocks (amino acids) and predict future shape?
Anfinsen’s Thermodynamic Hypothesis - Proteins fold into their final shape naturally, based only on their building blocks (amino acids) and their environment, irrespective of how it’s made, that is test tube proteins will fold the same way as a cell one. Also, protein folding follows the rule of chemistry. 

Hydrophobic Interaction, that is how parts of the protein's building blocks avoid water, was found to be one of the major reasons for protein folding. Proteins have water avoiding cores which are moved into oil-like environments taking up a certain amount of energy. So, Proteins unfold in oils and even when you mix up a protein's sequence, keeping only the pattern of water-loving and water-avoiding parts, it still folds correctly. Other important forces such as Hydrogen bonds, Van der Waals forces and Electrical charges also help determine the final shape after protein folding.
So how does this string know how to fold into exactly the right shape in just microseconds, when there are countless possible ways it could fold? The Funnel Concept is that, imagine you're on top of a mountain with a ball, and there's a valley below. No matter where you release the ball, it will eventually roll down to the bottom. Proteins work similarly, The unfolded protein starts at the top of the "energy funnel".Different molecules might take different paths down but they all end up in the same final shape at the bottom. This explains why proteins reliably fold into the same shape every time
In proteins, small sections fold into simpler structures, then these small pieces combine into larger sections. Finally, the larger sections come together to make the final structure, and folding occurs after every combination. The complexity of the final shape largely determines the folding speed of the protein. 
Zipping and Assembly Method (ZAM) is used to predict protein structures. The protein chain is divided into small segments of 8 amino acids each which are simulated independently for sampling of possible conformations at different temperatures. Fragments that show stable structures are identified and are then extended by adding additional amino acids. New simulations are performed on these extended fragments and this process repeats till stable structures are formed. Stable fragments that could potentially interact are identified and are simulated together to see if they form stable interactions.
